---
date: '2024-04-13T23:38:32+08:00'
draft: true
title: '使用Jekyll建立个人博客'
tags: ['Blog']
categories: ['Blog']
summary: ""
math: true
---
Blogs are essentially web applications deployed on a web server.

# Development Environment

There are various ways to implement a blog. I use the following techniques.

* **Jekyll**
Jekyll is library written by Ruby. It can translate plain text, markdown source files, ... into html files. Therefore, we can focus on content and Jekyll will help to generate relative web source files.

* **Chirpy**
The web template recommended. You can choose any themes you like [here](http://jekyllthemes.org/).

* **GitHub Page**
You can create a repository storing source files of your blog on GitHub. GitHub will deploy the application on its server.

To run Jekyll, you need to install the following environments:

* Ruby; (`ruby -v`)
* RubyGems; (`gem -v`)
* Gcc & Make; (`gcc -v | g++ -v | make -v`)
* Git; (`git --version`)

[Official documents](https://jekyllrb.com/docs) is the first choice to follow.

> Notes: 
> * Ruby is a programming language;
> * RubyGems is Ruby's package manager;
> * Bundler is Ruby's build tool, just like maven to Java;
> * When you are using RubyGems and Bundler, you may use VPN to reach their official repositories because of GFW if you are in China.
> * You can also configure RubyGems and Bundler to use mirrors like Tsinghua Tuna. But pay attention, if you are going to host your blog on GitHub Page, you should not change to mirrors in China since these mirrors may block requests from GitHub servers.

# Initialize the Blog Repository

If you don't have the energy to design from scratch, you can start with a template.

Then following the guides from the [template's official website](https://chirpy.cotes.page/) to quickly establish your blog project.

In short, it involves the following steps;

* Clone the template's repository to local directory;
* Since it's a Ruby project, you can use `bundle install` to install all the dependencies according to the configuration file provided by the template. Bundler will manage installed packages in some local directories, so if all the dependencies are already downloaded and installed, repetitive `bundle install` will not do anything.
* Update \_config.yml, this is the core configuration file whose content is in key-value style. Just follow some guidences with high quality online.
* Create a GitHub repository obeying GitHub Page's rules.
* In GitHub repository settings, choose GitHub Actions to automatically build and deploy your blog on commitment.
* Commit and push your local repository to GitHub. Wait for automatic deployment to complete, and you will be able to visit your initialized blog!


After these, a template website is expected to be shown on your GitHub Page, whose default URL is [\[username_of_github\].github.io]().

# Customize the Blog

Just following guides on the template's official website. Most of the time our jobs are only to customize the main configuration files and add some markdown files containing articles. Others resources like .css files are linked to the template's repository, which should not be considered by our users.

# How It Works

Observing the Jekyll project, we can find that most files are `.yml` or `.md` file. `.yml` files are configuration files, `.md` files are content files.

To make blog work, we should first run Jekyll to generate the real web application project. Jekyll will read the `.yml` to get configuration parameters and read the `.md` to translate them to corresponding HTML files. Finally, Jekyll will generate the genuine web projects from our original one.

Then we just need to upload the project generated by Jekyll to the server device and deploy it into a web server software. After that, run the web server and the blog can be visited.

In fact, GitHub Actions' source files are also `.yml`  files. These files will record the executable command and some other necessary configurations. Some engine will read them and thus automatically deploy your Jekyll project.

# Reference

* [A Guidance on ZhiHu](https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/641525444)
* [The Template Used](https://chirpy.cotes.page/)